# Memory Hirearchy

Memory in a computer system is arranged in a hierarchy. At the top, we have primary storage, which consists of cache and main memory and provides very fast access to data. Then comes secondarystorage, which consists of slowerdevices, such as magnetic disks. Tertiary storage is the slowest class of storage devices; for example, optical disks and
tapes. 

- Tapes
Tapes are relatively inexpensive and can store very large amounts of data. They are a good choice for archival storage, that is, when we need to maintain data for a long period but do not expect to access it very often.

The main drawback of tapes is that they are sequential access devices. We must
essentially step through all the data in order and cannot directly access a given
location on tape. This makes tapes unsuitable for storing
operational data, or data that is frequently accessed. Tapes are mostly used to
back up operational data periodically.

- Magnetic Disks
Magnetic disks support direct access to a desired location and are widely used
for database applications.

Data is stored on disk in units called disk blocks. A disk block is a contiguous
sequence of bytes and is the unit in which data is written to a disk and read
from a disk. Blocks are arranged in concentric rings called tracks, on one or
more platters.

The time taken for database operations is affected
significantly by how data is stored On disks. The time for moving blocks to
or from disk usually dominates the time taken for database operations. To
minimize this time, it is necessary to locate data records strategically on disk
because of the geometry and mechanics of disks. In essence, if two records are
frequently used together, we should place them close together. The 'closest'
that two records can be on a disk is to be on the same block. In decreasing
order of closeness, they could be on the same track, the same cylinder, or an
adjacent cylinder.

## Redundant arrays of Independent Disks [RAID]

Disks are potential bottlenecks for system performance and storage system reliability.
A disk array is an arrangement of several disks, organized to increase performance and improve reliability of the resulting storage system. Performance is increased through data striping.

Data striping distributes data over several
disks to give the impression of having a single large, very fast disk. Reliability is improved through redundancy. Instead of having a single copy of the data, redundant information is maintained.

The redundant information is carefully organized so that, in Case of a disk failure, it can be used to reconstruct
the contents of the failed disk. Disk arrays that implement a combination of
data striping and redundancy are called redundant arrays of independent disks, or in short, **RAID**.!  
Several RAID organizations, referred to as RAID
levels, have been proposed. Each RAID level represents a different trade-off
between reliability and performance.

## Data Striping
A disk array gives the user the abstraction of having a single, very large disk.
If the user issues an I/O request, we first identify the set of physical disk blocks
that store the data requested. These disk blocks may reside on a single disk in
the array or may be distributed over several disks in the array. Then the set
of blocks is retrieved from the disk(s) involved. Thus, how we distribute the
data over the disks in the array influences how many disks are involved when
an I/O request is processed.

In data striping, the data is segmented into equal-size partitions distributed
over multiple disks. The size of the partition is called the striping unit. The
partitions are usually distributed using a round-robin algorithm: If the disk
array consists of D disks, then partition i is written onto disk i mod D.

## Redundancy 

While having more disks increases storage system performance, it also lowers overall storage system reliability. Assume that the mean-time-to-failure
(MTTF), of a single disk is 50, 000 hours (about 5.7 years). Then, the MTTF
of an array of 100 disks is only 50, 000/100 = 500 hours or about 21 days

Reliability of a disk array can be increased by storing redundant information.
If a disk fails, the redundant information is used to reconstruct the data on the
failed disk.

Redundancy can immensely increase the MTTF of a disk array.
When incorporating redundancy into a disk array design, we have to make two
choices.

 First, we have to decide where to store the redundant information. We
can either store the redundant information on a small number of check disks
or distribute the redundant information uniformly over all disks.

The second choice we have to make is how to compute the redundant information. Most disk arrays store parity information: In the parity scheme, an
extra check disk contains information that can be used to recover from failure
of anyone disk in the array. Assume that we have a disk array with D disks
and consider the first bit on each data disk. Suppose that i of the D data bits
are 1. The first bit on the check disk is set to 1 if i is odd; otherwise, it is set to 0. This bit on the check disk is called the parity of the data bits. The check
disk contains parity information for each set of corresponding D data bits.
To recover the value of the first bit of a failed disk we first count the number
of bits that are 1 on the D - 1 nonfailed disks; let this number be j. If j is odd
and the parity bit is 1, or if j is even and the parity bit is 0, then the value
of the bit on the failed disk must have been O. Otherwise, the value of the bit
on the failed disk must have been 1. Thus, with parity we can recover from
failure of anyone disk. Reconstruction of the lost information involves reading
all data disks and the check disk. [](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parity_bit)

