# LEVEL 1 + 0 
RAID 10, also known as RAID 1+0, is a RAID configuration that combines disk mirroring and disk striping to protect data. It requires a minimum of four disks and stripes data across mirrored pairs. As long as one disk in each mirrored pair is functional, data can be retrieved. If two disks in the same mirrored pair fail, all data will be lost because there is no parity in the striped sets.

- A RAID 1 configuration copies data from one drive to another, mirroring and duplicating data to provide improved fault tolerance and data protection. Data is fully protected as the mirror copy is available if the originating drive is disabled or unavailable. Because it makes a full duplicate of the data, RAID 1 requires twice as much storage capacity as the original data.

- RAID 0 doesn't provide any data protection; its sole purpose is to enhance drive access performance. It does that by spreading the data out across two or more drives. That way multiple read/write heads on the drives can write or access portions of data simultaneously, thus speeding up overall processing.

- RAID 10 provides data redundancy and improves performance. It is a good option for I/O-intensive applications -- including email, web servers, databases and operations that require high disk performance. It's also good for organizations that require little to no downtime.

- The two-number format of RAID 10/1+0 is known as a nested RAID configuration because it combines two RAID levels to enhance performance. Other nested RAID levels are:

01/0+1
03/0+3
50/5+0
60/6+0
100/10+0

- While RAID 1+0 is similar to RAID 0+1, the reversed order of the numbers indicates the two RAID levels are layered in the opposite order. RAID 1+0 mirrors two drives together and then creates a striped set with the pair. RAID 0+1 creates two stripe sets and then mirrors them. While both RAID levels use the same number of drives, they are not synonymous.